[#extending-eldev]
== Extending Eldev

Eldev is written to be not just configurable, but also extensible.  It
makes perfect sense to have additional code in file `Eldev` — if your
project has uncommon building steps.  And also in
`~/.config/eldev/config` — if you want a special command for your own
needs, for example.  Or maybe in `Eldev-local` — if you need something
extra only for one specific project that you maintain.

[#hooks]
=== Hooks

Eldev defines several hooks executed at different times (more might be
added later).  Due to historical reasons, Eldev doesn’t follow Emacs
naming convention on using `-hook` only for standard hooks (i.e. those
not accepting any arguments) and `-functions` in other cases.
Functions for many of the hooks listed below do receive arguments.

`eldev-executing-command-hook (COMMAND)`::

    Run before executing any command.  Command name (as a symbol) is
    passed to the hook’s functions as the only argument.  This is
    always the “canonical” command name, even if it is executed using
    an alias.

`eldev-COMMAND-hook`::

    Run before executing specific command, functions have no
    arguments.  Eldev itself uses it (i.e. in its file `Eldev`) to
    print a disclaimer about its fairly slow tests.

{since-0-2} `eldev-load-dependencies-hook (TYPE ADDITIONAL-SETS)`::

    Executed after successfully loading dependencies.  Functions are
    called with arguments `TYPE` and `ADDITIONAL-SETS`.  `TYPE` is
    either `t` if the project is being loaded for actual use, symbol
    `load-only` if it is loaded only for side effect (e.g. to build a
    tree of its dependencies), and `nil` if invoked from
    `eldev-load-extra-dependencies` (i.e. if the project is not being
    loaded at all: only some additional sets).  The second is a list
    of <<additional-dependencies,additional dependency sets>>.

{since-0-6} `eldev-before-loading-dependencies-hook (TYPE ADDITIONAL-SETS)`::

    Similar to the previous hook, but called _before_ dependencies are
    loaded.  Function arguments are the same.

{since-0-1-1} `eldev-build-system-hook`::

    Hook executed whenever build system is used.  This is useful since
    at least commands `build`, `compile` and `package` invoke the
    build system: it would be impractical to add the same function to
    all three hooks.

{since-0-2} `eldev-test-FRAMEWORK-hook (SELECTORS)`::

    Called immediately before executing tests with given framework
    (<<ert,ERT>>, <<buttercup,Buttercup>>, <<doctest,Doctest>>,
    <<ecukes,Ecukes>>).  Functions on the hook get passed `SELECTORS`
    as the only argument.  At this point project dependencies and
    additional set `test` will have been loaded already, so functions
    can `require` features from the project.

=== Writing builders

Eldev build system provides standard builders that cover all basic
needs of Elisp packages.  However, some projects have uncommon build
steps.  Instead of writing custom shell scripts, you can integrate
them into the overall build process — which also simplifies further
development.

An example of a project with additional build steps is Eldev itself.
Its executable(s) are combined from executable template that is
OS-specific and a common Elisp bootstrapping script.  For example,
`bin/eldev` is generated from files `bin/eldev.in` and
`bin/bootstrap.el.part`.  However, only the first file counts as the
source; see how function `eldev-substitute` works.

There is a simple builder for this in file `Eldev` of the project:

[source]
----
(eldev-defbuilder eldev-builder-preprocess-.in (source target)
  :short-name     "SUBST"
  :message        source-and-target
  :source-files   "*.in"
  :targets        (".in" -> "")
  :collect        ":default"
  :define-cleaner (eldev-cleaner-preprocessed
                   "Delete results of preprocessing `.in' files.  This is specific
to Eldev itself."
                   :aliases prep)
  (let ((modes (file-modes target)))
    (eldev-substitute source target)
    (when (or modes (string-prefix-p "bin/" target))
      (set-file-modes target (or modes #o755)))))
----

Here `eldev-defbuilder` is a macro much like `defun`.  It defines an
Elisp function named `eldev-builder-preprocess-.in` and registers it
with parameters (the keyword lines before the body) as an Eldev
builder.  Predictably, list `(source target)` specifies function
arguments.

Let’s skip the keywords for a bit and have a look at the body.  It
works exactly like in a normal Elisp function.  Its job is to generate
`target` from `source` using builder-specific means.  This particular
builder calls function `eldev-substite` that does the actual work
(this function is available also to your project, should you need it).
But your builders could do whatever you want, including launching
external processes (C/C++ compiler, a Python script, etc.) and using
anything from Elisp repertoire.  Note that return value of the body is
ignored.  If building the target fails, builder should signal an
error.

Now back to the keyword parameters.  As you can see, they all have a
name and exactly one value after it.  First comes parameter
`:short-name`.  It specifies what you see in the target tree of the
project, i.e. builder’s name for the user.  It is not required;
without it Eldev would have used `preprocess-.in` as user-visible
name.

Next parameter is `:message`.  It determines what Eldev prints when
the builder is actually invoked.  For example, when byte-compiling,
you’d see messages like this:

    ELC      some-file.el

That’s because byte-compiling builder has its `:message` set to
`source` (the default).  Other valid values are `target` and
`source-and-target` (as in the example).  Both `source` and `target`
can be pluralized (i.e. `sources-and-target` is also a valid value),
but singular/plural is not important in this case as both work
identically.  Finally, value of `:message` can be a function, in which
case it is called with the same arguments as the builder itself and
should return a string.

Value of `:source-files` parameter must be a <<filesets,fileset>>.  In
the above example, fileset consists of only one simple rule — which is
actually enough in most cases, — but it could also be much more
complicated.  All files that match the fileset and do not match
`eldev-standard-excludes` will be processed using this builder.

Parameter `:targets` defines the rule used to construct target names
out of sources matched by `:source-files`.  There are several ways to
define this rule, we’ll consider them in <<target-rules,their own
subsection>>.

Keyword `:collect` determines how targets generated by this builder
are “collected” into virtual targets.  In the example all such targets
are simply added to the virtual target `:default`.  However, here too
we have several other possibilities, which will be described
<<collecting-virtual-targets,later>>.

Finally, keyword `:define-cleaner` provides a simple way of linking
builders with the <<cleaning,cleaning system>>.

Another important keyword is `:type`.  It is not used here only
because the example builder is of the default and most common type
that generates one target for each source file.  All possible types
are: `one-to-one` (the default), `one-to-many` (several targets from
one source file), `many-to-one` and `many-to-many`.  If you write a
builder of a non-default type, be aware that it will be called with a
list of strings instead of a single string as one or both of its
arguments, as appropriate.  You should probably also name them in
plural in the definition in this case, to avoid confusion.

[#target-rules]
==== Target rules

Target rules define which target(s) will be built from given
source(s).  There are several ways to define a target rule.  Yet more
can be added in the future as real-world needs accumulate.

`TARGET`::

    All the sources will be passed together as a list to the builder
    to generate one `TARGET`.  This is suitable for `many-to-one`
    builders.

`(TARGET-1 [TARGET-2 [\...]])`::

    Build several `TARGETS` out of all the sources.  This is for
    `many-to-many` and `one-to-many` builders.

`(SOURCE-SUFFIX \-> TARGET-SUFFIX)`::

    Build target name from source name by replacing filename suffixes.
    `SOURCE-SUFFIX` can also be a list of strings, in which case any
    suffix from the list will be replaced.  This is the type of target
    rule you can see in the example and is suitable for `one-to-one`
    builders.  Another use of this rule type could be seen in
    byte-compiling builder:
+
        :targets        (".el" -> ".elc")

And the most powerful of all target rules: a function (can be a lambda
form or a function name).  It is called with a list of sources (even
if the builder is of `one-to-one` or `one-to-many` type) and must
return one of the types enumerated above.

[#collecting-virtual-targets]
==== Collecting into virtual targets

Real targets generated by the builders can optionally be combined into
virtual targets.  The latter are used to easily build all real targets
of the same type; some (`:default`, `:compile` etc.)  also have
special meaning to certain commands.

Like with the target rules, there are several ways to collect the
targets.

`VIRTUAL-TARGET`::

    All real targets generated by the builder are combined into given
    `VIRTUAL-TARGET`.  This is what you can see in the example.

`(VIRTUAL-TARGET-1 [VIRTUAL-TARGET-2 [\... VIRTUAL-TARGET-N]])`::

    Combine the real targets into `VIRTUAL-TARGET-N`, then put it to
    the preceding virtual target and so on.  This format is currently
    unused in standard Eldev builders.  It can generate target trees
    of this form:
+
--
    :gen-files
        :gen-sources
            :gen-el
                foo.el.in
                bar.el.in

It is expected (even if not required) that a different builder adds
another branch to the tree, actually making it useful.
--

`(ENTRY...)`, each `ENTRY` being `(REAL-TARGETS VIRTUAL-TARGETS)`::

    Both of `REAL-TARGETS` and `VIRTUAL-TARGETS` must be either a list
    or a single target string.  For each `ENTRY` this repeats the
    logic of one of the two formats above, but instead of all targets
    for the builder uses only those listed in `REAL-TARGETS` for the
    `ENTRY`.  This is not often needed, but can be useful if builder’s
    targets come in two or more substantially different kinds.

Like with <<target-rules,target rules>>, you can specify a function
here.  Such a function gets called with a list of real targets and
must return a collection rule in one of the formats listed above.

==== Summary

To define a builder you need to write an Elisp function that generates
target(s) from source(s).  If it processes multiple sources at once or
generates multiple targets, give it the appropriate `:type`.  Write a
fileset that matches its `:source-files` and a rule to determine
target names from those — parameter `:targets`.  If you want the
targets grouped together into virtual target(s), add `:collect`
keyword.  You should probably also add a `:define-cleaner` that
removes generated targets.

Parameters `:name`, `:short-name`, `:message` and `:briefdoc` are all
fully presentational and thus not very important.  But if you want to
write a nice and polished builder, investigate them too.

=== Adding commands and options

Eldev has lots of standard commands, but sometimes you need to define
yet more.  Commands should generally be defined for things that cannot
be reformulated in terms of building targets.  If a command would just
create a file, e.g. extract documentation from source code, an
additional builder would be more suitable.

Defining a command is not much more complicated than defining a normal
Elisp function:

[source]
----
(eldev-defcommand mypackage-parrot (&rest parameters)
  "Repeat parameters from the command line."
  :parameters     "TEXT-TO-PARROT"
  :aliases        (copycat ape)
  (unless parameters
    (signal 'eldev-wrong-command-usage `(t "Nothing to say")))
  (eldev-output "%s" (mapconcat #'identity parameters " ")))
----

Macro `eldev-defcommand` works much like `defun`, but additionally it
adds the new function to the list of Eldev command handlers.  New
command receives name built from the function name by removing package
prefix.  If that doesn’t produce the needed result in your case
(e.g. if package prefix is two words in your project), you can always
specify name explicitly by using `:command` parameter.  You can also
give your command any number of aliases, as shown above.

Keyword `:parameter` describes what the command expects to see on the
command line.  It is used when invoking `eldev help COMMAND` to
improve documentation: all commands are automatically documented.  The
short one-liner for `eldev help` is derived from the function’s
documentation by taking the first sentence.  If this is not good
enough in your case, use keyword `:briefdoc` to set it explicitly.

When command is invoked from command line, Eldev calls the
corresponding function, passing all remaining parameters to it as
strings.  The example command above just parrots the parameters back
at user, in accordance to its name.

==== Defining options

You have probably noticed that the command function we’ve defined
doesn’t accept any options.  In fact, this is true for all commands in
Eldev: options are not _passed_ to them.  Eldev takes a different
approach: whenever a (recognized) option is encountered on the command
line, appropriate function is called, which is supposed to alter
global state.  This way it is easy to share options between multiple
commands when needed.

So, with that in mind, let’s expand our example command with an
option:

[source]
----
(defvar mypackage-parrot-colorize-as nil)

(eldev-defcommand mypackage-parrot (&rest parameters)
  "Repeat parameters from the command line.  If you want, I can even
colorize them!"
  :parameters     "TEXT-TO-PARROT"
  :aliases        (copycat ape)
  (unless parameters
    (signal 'eldev-wrong-command-usage `(t "Nothing to say")))
  (let ((text (mapconcat #'identity parameters " ")))
     (when mypackage-parrot-colorize-as
       (setf text (eldev-colorize text mypackage-parrot-colorize-as)))
     (eldev-output "%s" text)))

(eldev-defoption mypackage-parrot-colorize (&optional style)
  "Apply given STYLE to the parroted text (`section' if not specified)"
  :options        (-c --colorize)
  :optional-value STYLE
  :for-command    parrot
  (setf mypackage-parrot-colorize-as (intern (or style "section"))))
----

Definition of `mypackage-parrot` is updated, but there is nothing
Eldev-specific here.  Let’s rather have a look at the option
definition.

Unlike for command function, name of option function is not important.
Instead, how the option looks like on the command line is determined
by `:options` keyword.  It can specify any number of alternatives, but
they all must be either short-style (single `-` followed by one
letter) or long-style (`--` followed by a longer name) options.  Some
options take a value; it is determined by parameter `:optional-value`
or `:value` (if the value is mandatory) and must match arguments in
function definition.

Options can be either global or command-specific.  In the latter case
— the one you’ll typically need — you define to which command(s) the
option applies using `:for-command` parameter.  In our case its value
is a single command, but it can also be a list of commands.

To test how the new option works, run:

    $ eldev parrot -c Repeat this

It should print text “Repeat this” in bold, unless you’ve disabled
output colorizing.

Note that the command doesn’t repeat “-c”, even though it appears on
the command line.  That’s because Eldev doesn’t pass the options as
parameters to commands: only non-option arguments remain.

Documentation (i.e. output of `eldev help parrot`) for the command we
defined above now automatically lists the accepted option:

....
Usage: eldev [OPTION...] parrot TEXT-TO-PARROT

Command aliases: copycat, ape

Options:
  -c, --colorize[=STYLE]
                        Apply given STYLE to the parroted text (‘section’ if
                        not specified)

Repeat parameters from the command line.  If you want, I can even
colorize them!
....

==== Reusing options for new commands

{since-1-7} Sometimes you want to define a command that is similar to
something provided by Eldev by default, yet does something a bit
differently — or in addition.  Function `eldev-inherit-options` may
come handy here: it takes all (or at least most) options that can be
passed to command A and make them work also with command B.  See
function Elisp documentation for the syntax.

=== Custom test runners

NOTE: _This feature is present in Eldev, but is not documented yet._
